Original Chunks:
MARTIAL LAW IN ENGLAND R.B. TEWARI* Martial law has its roots in that body of law which was administered by the Court of the Constable and Marshal. This has been described by Coke as the fountain of Marshal Law.1 It was by no means clear as to what the jurisdiction of this Court was. A Statute of Richard II defines the jurisdiction of the Court thus : "To the Constable it pertaineth to have cognizance of contracts touching deeds of arms and of war out of the realm, and also of the things that touch war within the realm, which cannot be determined nor discussed by the common law, with other ways and customs to the same matter pertaining, which other constables heretofore have duly and reasonably used in their time."2 The two main branches of the jurisdiction of the Court fell under two categories: (1) Jurisdiction over appeals of death or murder committed beyond the seas,3 and (2) the offences and miscarriages of soldiers contrary to the laws and the rules of the army.4 For historical reasons the importance and use of the Court of Constable and Marshal was on the decline during the Tudor period. The common law courts during the 17th Century were ill-disposed towards it as they regarded it as a rival to their own authority. The Court of Marshal was also out of favour with Parlia­ ment, whose victory in 1640 spelled its down-fall.5 It may be noted that the. Court of Constable was not functioning since the time of * LL. M. (Lucknow), J.S.D. (Yale); Reader, Faculty of Law, Allahabad University. 1. Lowry, James M, Martial Law within the Realm of England, 1914, p. 1. /'The criminal jurisdiction of the Court except in time of war was restricted to murder and other crimes committed by Englishmen abroad, but in war time it became a very powerful Court with widely extended functions." It followed the march of the Army and dealt summarily with all offenders, acting practically as a permanent Court Martial. Ibid, 11. 2. 13 Rich. II, $t. 1, c. 2.'; Holdsworth, "Martial Law Historically Considered," 18 £,.£./?. 117. 3. 1 Hen. IV, c. 14.^ 4. Hale, History of Common Law, 42. 5. It was voted a gievance in 1640, Rushworth, part 2, Vol. II, 1056; Hold- worth, 18 L. Q. R., U7, 118. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute 72 MARHAL LAW IN ENGLAND Henry VIII. In the time of Queen Anne an objection was raised as to the legality of the Court of Marshal in the absence of the Court of Constable.6 It was held that it was not a properly constituted court and any jurisdiction exercised by it was "a mere encroach­ ment. "7 The last case it tried was that of Sir H. Blount's.8 It completely went into oblivion ever since.9 We are not here concerned with the jurisdiction of the Court over the army of the Crown, at home or abroad, nor are we here to deal with its jurisdiction over alien enemies within or outside the British territory. These are distinct subjects which fall under the military law and the prerogative of the Crown, which is expressed in the Mutiny Act and the Articles of War. What we are concerned with here is the nature and the scope of martial law as applicable to the citizens within the State at the time of rebellion, insurrection or invasion. As a matter of fact the jurisdiction of the Crown over the army has today gradually expanded, and it exercises more power over it through the medium of a systematic law than it does over the citizen. The Crown's authority over the citizen has of late decreased. Therefore, whether in war, or in peace, the Crown does not have the same authority over the citizen as it has over the military forces of the realm. Its control over the citizen has been completely altered in form and content. It may, therefore, be worth our while briefly to survey this relationship between the two through the panorama of British history from the time of the early kings down to the present. One of the firs.t instances of martial law in England was the rebellion of Wat Tyler in the reign of Richard II. Tyler was killed and his followers were defeated. But even then most of them were executed without any form or ceremony.10 But, it may be interesting to note that an Act of Indemnity was passed to exempt the supporters of the king from responsibility for any excesses committed by them in suppressing the rebellion.11 The practice of executing rebels and 6. Holdsworth, 118; see Chambers v. Jennings. (1701) 7 Mod. 125. 7. Ibid. 8. 8 Black. Com. (lsted.) 103—106. 9. Lord Mansfield exhibits complete ignorance_of this court, when he says: "As to plunder or booty in a mere continental landvwar it never has been important enough to give rise to any question about it.. .. Inhere is no instance in history or law, ancient or modern, of any question before any legal judicature ever having existed about it in this kingdom." See Koldswoth, 118 10. Lowry, James M, Martial Law within the Realm of England, p. 12. 11. Lowry, p. 13; 5 Rich. II, c. 6. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute R. B. TEWARI 73 those captured in war was carried out in the reign of Henry IV and Henry VI, during the Civil War. But whether a person was put to the sword or executed, there was no semblance of trial at all.12 Lord Chief Justice of England, Sir A. Cockburn, in his charge to the Grand Jury, in the trial of Colonel Nelson and Lieutenant Brand, for the murder of George William Gordon, a leader in the Jamaica Rebellion, in 1866, says: "The first instance I can discover in which anything under the name and pretence of martial law, in the sense in which we are talking of it—that is, not of law exercised upon persons
says: "As to plunder or booty in a mere continental landvwar it never has been important enough to give rise to any question about it.. .. Inhere is no instance in history or law, ancient or modern, of any question before any legal judicature ever having existed about it in this kingdom." See Koldswoth, 118 10. Lowry, James M, Martial Law within the Realm of England, p. 12. 11. Lowry, p. 13; 5 Rich. II, c. 6. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute R. B. TEWARI 73 those captured in war was carried out in the reign of Henry IV and Henry VI, during the Civil War. But whether a person was put to the sword or executed, there was no semblance of trial at all.12 Lord Chief Justice of England, Sir A. Cockburn, in his charge to the Grand Jury, in the trial of Colonel Nelson and Lieutenant Brand, for the murder of George William Gordon, a leader in the Jamaica Rebellion, in 1866, says: "The first instance I can discover in which anything under the name and pretence of martial law, in the sense in which we are talking of it—that is, not of law exercised upon persons in rebellion, taken in arms or in hot pursuit from the field and which, if it can be called law at all, may more properly be called the law of arms or law of the sword than martial law—but the law exer­ cised in the form of trial—is in the reign of Henry VII, and I think it very doubtful what the martial law was that historians speak of there."13 Lord Chief Justice Cockburn proceeds to state that some days after the restoration of order and peace and the complete control over the insurrectionary elements had been achieved, the King started on the pursuit of those who had allegedly acted as "abettors and fomentors of the recent troubles."14 In the words of Lord Bacon the King "made a progress from Lincoln to the northern parts For all along as he went, with much severety and strict inquisition, partly by martial law and partly by commission, were punished adherents and aiders of the rebels. Not all by death, but by fines and ransoms, which spared life and raised treasure."15 It may be noted that the martial law to which Lord Bacon referred to was some summary process, which differed from the ordinary tribunals of the country. It is not clear, however, what exact form and proceeding this procedure had. It is of great interest to note that this inquisition, trial and punishment was resort­ ed to after the rebellion had been suppressed, and in the words of the Lord Chief Justice was "utterly illegal." Martial law could not be applied for bringing men to trial for treason after the rebellion had been suppressed.16 Lord Cockburn says in this connection, "It is well established that the only jurisdiction of it is founded on the assumption of an absolute necessity— 12. Ibid., p. 14. 13. Cockburn C.J. in R. \t*Nelson and Brand cited by Lowry, pp. 14-15. 14. Lowry, 15-16. But Henry VII was not so much anxious for blood as he was desirous of money. To quote Lord Cockburn, "for to do Henry VII justice, it was not blood that fie was greedy of, but gold." Ibid., p. 16. 15. Ibid., p. 16. 16. Ibid., p. 17. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute 74 MARTIAL LAW IN ENGLAND a necessity paramount to all law and which, lest the com­ monwealth should perish, authorizes this arbitrary and despotic mode of proceeding: but it has never been said or thought, that martial law could be resorted to when all the evil of rebellion had passed away, and order and tranquility had been restored, for the mere purpose of trying and punishing persons whom there was no longer any sufficient cause for withdrawing from the ordinary tribunals and ordinary laws.' 7 There is again a reference to martial law in the reign of Edward VI in the Commissions which were issued to the Lords Lieutenant of the Counties whose office was created on the occasion of the "routs" and "uproars" in most of the counties of England. In the Commis­ sions these officers were referred to as the King's Justices as well as Lieutenants. The Commissions charged them, among other things, to "be the King's Lieutenants within the respective counties for levying of men, and to fight againt the King's enemies and rebels, and to execute upon them martial law."18 In the same year when unrest and disorder was at a high pitch a severe Commission was given out in the month of March to John, Earl of Bedford, and several other great persons therein named, to put in execution all such martial law as shall be thought in their discretion most necessary to be executed."19 In the reign of Queen Mary a proclamation was issued in which it was said that the introduction of heretical and seditious works into England was to be punished by martial law, and whoever was found in possession of such books should be deemed a rebel and should be executed according to martial law.20 There is an instance of the Commission of Martial Law having been issued in the reign of Queen Elizabeth I. In 1369 the Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland had risen in rebellion and besieged and taken Barnard Castle, and committed other acts of treasonable warfare. The rising took place and was suppressed in the month of December. The Earl of Sussex received from the Queen a Commission, evidently on the lines of those later issued in the time of Charles I. The Earl of Sussex appointed Sir George Bowes his 17. Ibid., pp. 17-18. 18. Strype, Ecclesiastical Memorials, Vol. Ill, p. 278; Lowry, pp. 18-20. Lord Cock­ burn says that there is no evidence that this commission was ever acted upon. Ibid., p. 21. 19. Lowry, p. 20. 20. Strype, Vol. VI, p. 459; Lowry
shall be thought in their discretion most necessary to be executed."19 In the reign of Queen Mary a proclamation was issued in which it was said that the introduction of heretical and seditious works into England was to be punished by martial law, and whoever was found in possession of such books should be deemed a rebel and should be executed according to martial law.20 There is an instance of the Commission of Martial Law having been issued in the reign of Queen Elizabeth I. In 1369 the Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland had risen in rebellion and besieged and taken Barnard Castle, and committed other acts of treasonable warfare. The rising took place and was suppressed in the month of December. The Earl of Sussex received from the Queen a Commission, evidently on the lines of those later issued in the time of Charles I. The Earl of Sussex appointed Sir George Bowes his 17. Ibid., pp. 17-18. 18. Strype, Ecclesiastical Memorials, Vol. Ill, p. 278; Lowry, pp. 18-20. Lord Cock­ burn says that there is no evidence that this commission was ever acted upon. Ibid., p. 21. 19. Lowry, p. 20. 20. Strype, Vol. VI, p. 459; Lowry p. 21, www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute E. B. TEWAEI 75 Provost-Marshal, who made a circuit through Durham and Yorkshire between the 2nd and the 20th January, 1589, and executed at various places 600 persons.21 There is another reference to a proclamation being issued by Queen Elizabeth I in which it was declared that any person introducing Bulls from Rome, or any traitorous works from abroad, should be punished by her lieutenants according to martial law.22 Lord Chief Justice Cockburn despite his sympathetic appraisal of the difficulties in which Elizabeth found herself at that time due to the opposition of Pope and the enmity of Spain, says that "we cannot doubt that she was going altogether beyond the powers with which the Constitution of England had intrusted her."23 Lord Coke observes as to the legal character of such commissions and the punish­ ments which they sanctioned, that "If a lieutenant, or other that hath commission of martial authority in time of peace, hang or other­ wise execute any man by colour of martial law, this is murder for this is against Magna Carta, c. 29.24 King James I, issued a Commission to Lord Compton as Lord- Lieutenant of Wales to the effect that in times of necessity he would summon the Militia "To fight all enemies, traytors and rebels from tyme to tyme and them to invade, resist, suppress, subdue, slea, kill, and put to execution of death, by all waies and meanes from tyme to tyme by your direction. And further to doe, execute, and use, against the said enemies, traytors and such like offenders and their adherents from tyme to tyme as necessite shall require by your discretion, the Lawe called Martial Law according to the Lawe Martian1, and to slea, destroy and put to execution, such and as many of them as you shall think meete by your good discretion to be put to death."25 Three Commissions were issued in the reign of Charles I, on 24th November, 1617; 20th July, 1620 and 30th December, 1624. The first Commission is for the government of Wales and the counties of Worcester, Hereford and Shropshire. It is directed to certain persons to call out "the array of the county," and then to lead the array: 21. Stephen, History of Criminal Law, Vol. 1, p. 210. 22. Lowry, pp. 2*1-22. 23. Lowry, p. 24. 24. Coke, 3rd Institute, c.7; p. 52; Hale, History of Common Law, p. 34; Stephen, History of Criminal Law, Vol. I, p. 210. 25. Lowry, p. 26. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute 76 MARTIAL LAW IN ENGLAND "As well against all and singular our enemies, as also against all and singular rebels, traytors, and other offenders and their adherents, against our Crown and dignities, within our said principalities and dominions of North Wales and South Wales, the marches of the same, and the counties and places aforesaid, and with the said traytors and rebels from tyme to tyme to fight, and them to invade, resist, suppresse, subdue, slay, kill, and to put to execution of death, by all ways and means, from tyme to tyme by your discretion. "And further to doe, execute, and use against the said enemies, traytors, rebels, and such other like offenders and their adherents afore-mentioned, from tyme to tyme as neces­ sities shall require, by your discretion, to the law called martiall law according to the law martial, and of such offenders apprehended or being brought into subjection, to save home you shall think to be saved and to slave, detroye, and to put to execution of death, such and as many of them as you shall think mete, by your good discretion, to be put to death." The second Commission empowers Sir Robert Munsell to govern the crews of certain ships intended for the suppression of piracy, and gives him "full powers to execute and take away their life, or any member, in form and order of martial law." The third is a commission to the Mayor of Dover, and others, empowering them: "To proceed according to the justice of martial law against such soldiers with any of our list aforesaid, and other dissolute persons joining them, or any of them, as during such time as any of our said troops or companies or soldiers shall remain or abide there, and not be trans­ ported thence, shall, within any of the places or precincts aforesaid, at any time after the publication of this our commission, commit any robberies, felonies, mutinies, or other outrages or misdemeanours which, by the martial law, should or ou^ht to be punished with death, and by such summary course and order as is agreeable to martial law, and as is used in armies in time of war, to proceed to the trial and condemnation
and as many of them as you shall think mete, by your good discretion, to be put to death." The second Commission empowers Sir Robert Munsell to govern the crews of certain ships intended for the suppression of piracy, and gives him "full powers to execute and take away their life, or any member, in form and order of martial law." The third is a commission to the Mayor of Dover, and others, empowering them: "To proceed according to the justice of martial law against such soldiers with any of our list aforesaid, and other dissolute persons joining them, or any of them, as during such time as any of our said troops or companies or soldiers shall remain or abide there, and not be trans­ ported thence, shall, within any of the places or precincts aforesaid, at any time after the publication of this our commission, commit any robberies, felonies, mutinies, or other outrages or misdemeanours which, by the martial law, should or ou^ht to be punished with death, and by such summary course and order as is agreeable to martial law, and as is used in armies in time of war, to proceed to the trial and condemnation of such delinquents and offenders, and them cause to be executed and put to death according to the law martial, for an www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute It. B, TEWARI 77 example of terror to others, and to keep the rest in due awe and obedience."26 A careful perusal of these Commissions from the time of Henry VII to the reign of Charles I, shows that they are marked by the feature of punishing the rebels after the revolt has been suppressed. The function of the tribunals trying such offenders is prima facie illegal, and in the words of Lord Coke already referred to "murder." Martial law could not be resorted to as a mode of punishing rebels after the rebellion had been suppressed and order restored. It is this widespread and enthusiastic tendency on the part of the English rulers which the Petition of Right attempted to arrest. It made illegal the application of martial law during peace to soldiers and civilians alike. It recited that "of late great companies of soldiers and mariners have been dispersed into divers counties of the realm, and the inhabitants against their wills have been compelled to receive them in their house;"27 that by 25 Ed. II and Magna Carta "no man shall be forejudged of life or limb against the form of the Great Charter and the law of the land," yet that "divers com­ missioners" have been appointed "with power and authority to pro­ ceed within the land, according to the justice of martial law against such soldiers and mariners, or other dissolute persons joining with them, as should commit any murder, robbery*, felony, mutiny or other outrage or misdemeanour whatsoever, and by such summary course and order as is agreeable to martial law, and as is used in armies in time of war," to try and execute such offenders according to martial law;28 that offenders have escaped punishment "upon pretence that the said offenders were punishable only by martial law."29 It therefore prays "that your Majesty would be pleased to remove the said soldiers and mariners," and "that the aforesaid commissions for proceeding by martial law may be revoked and that hereafter no commis­ sions of like nature may issue forth."30 Whether or not these Commissions were absolutely forbidden by the Petition of Right both in time of peace and war has been left ambiguous. But it is certain beyond an iota of doubt that these com­ missions are unlawful during peace time. It will be discussed later in these pages at some lengthy as to how far the prerogative right to promulgate martial law by commission or proclamation is still intact. 26. Stephen. History of Criminal Law, Vol, I, pp. 209-210. 27. S. 6 of the Petition of Right. 28. Ibid. S. 7. 29. Ibid. S.9. 30. Ibid. S, 10, www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute 78 MARTIAL LAW IN ENGLAND While discussing martial law the question arises as to who has the power to proclaim it. From the judgments delivered in the case of Ship-money two divergent points of view are noticeable. The majoriy opinion favours the recognition of the power of the Crown to proclaim martial law in its discretion to avert a possible danger to the country. The Crown alone was to judge as to whether or not the situation warranted promulgation of martial law. A passage from the judgment of Finch C.J., is directly in point :31 "In time of imminent danger, tempore belli, anything, and by any man, may be done, murder cannot be punished; There hath been and may be as great danger when the enemy is not discerned as when in arms and on the land. In the time of war when the course of law is stopped, when the judges have no power or place, when courts of justice can send out no process, in this case the king may charge his subjects, you grant. Mark what you grant; when there is such a confusion as to law, then the king may do it Then there may be a time of war in one part of the kingdom, and the courts of justice may sit. Now whether a danger be to all the kingdom or to a part, they are alike perilous, and all ought to be* charged Expectancy of danger, I hold, is sufficient ground for the king to charge his subjects; for if we stay till the danger comes, it will be then too late. And his averment of danger is not traversable, it must* be binding when he perceives and says there is a danger; "" The contrary view finds expression int the arguments of Mr. Holborne, one of the counsels for Hampden. He observes*: "Put the case an enemy has landed, to show what the powers
danger when the enemy is not discerned as when in arms and on the land. In the time of war when the course of law is stopped, when the judges have no power or place, when courts of justice can send out no process, in this case the king may charge his subjects, you grant. Mark what you grant; when there is such a confusion as to law, then the king may do it Then there may be a time of war in one part of the kingdom, and the courts of justice may sit. Now whether a danger be to all the kingdom or to a part, they are alike perilous, and all ought to be* charged Expectancy of danger, I hold, is sufficient ground for the king to charge his subjects; for if we stay till the danger comes, it will be then too late. And his averment of danger is not traversable, it must* be binding when he perceives and says there is a danger; "" The contrary view finds expression int the arguments of Mr. Holborne, one of the counsels for Hampden. He observes*: "Put the case an enemy has landed, to show what the powers are by our laws in that case for our defence; when there ib a particular appearance of instant and apparent danger, in that case particular property must yield much to neces­ sity. These cases our books warrant, as building of bulwarks on another man's ground, and burning corn. But where do our books say that upon fear of danger, though in the king's case, a man, can without leave make a bulwark in another man's land? I do not rea'd. As your lordships may observe in this case of apparent 31. 3 S.T. at p. 1234. 32. Ibidf www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute B.B TEWAEI 79 danger the power of the king; observe withal the power of the subject, and out of what principle this doth grow; whether out of form of law or out of necessity. In these cases of actual danger and actual invasion, it is not only in the power of the king, but a subject may do as much in diverse cases. For if there be an actual war, the subject may without any direction, may do any act upon any man's land, and invade any property towards defence; it is the law of necessity that doth it. Nay in that case the subject may prejudice the king himself in point of property Levis timor will not serve but such a fear as ariseth from an actual and apparent danger."*3 This gives rise to an important issue in regard to martial law, namely, to what extent is martial law in the prerogative discretion of the Crown, and whether, on the other hand, it is governed by the necessity of the situation alone. As regards the prerogative of the Crown it may be of interest to students of constitutional law to note that the Petition of Right put an end to it as far back as 1628. Sec­ tions 7, 8, 9 and 10 of the Petition of Right in effect lay down that the commissions under Great Seal which had of late been issued to certain persons to proceed " according to the justice of martial law, " were " wholly and directly contrary to the said laws and statutes of this realm." It was provided that henceforth no commissions of this nature may issue forth to any person or persons whatsoever.34 In the context of the Petition of Right, therefore, the judgment of the majority in the Ship-money case appears to be wrong. But the question still remains to what extent the Petition of Right has super­ seded the prerogative. In 1799, the Irish Parliament passed an Act,35 the effect of which was to put certain parts of the country which were affected by the rebellion, under martial law. This Act recites in the preamble " the wise and salutary exercise of , His Majesty's undoubted prerogative in executing martial law for de­ feating and dispersing such armed rebellious force, and bringing divers rebels and traitors to punishment in the most speedy and 33. 3. S.T. at p. 975; of pp.1012, 1013. "Royal power is to be used in cases of necessity an<Mmminent danger, when ordinary courses will not avail as in cases of rebellion, sudden invasion, and some other cases when martial law may be used, and ma,y not stay for legal proceedings.'* Crook J. at p. 1162, 34. Petition of Right, 3 Chas. I, c. 1; Stephen, History of Criminal Law of England, Vol. 1, p. 208-209. 35. See Holdsworth, "Martial la\y? Historically Considered" 1§ L. Q,./?., p, !26t www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute 80 MARTIAL LAW IN ENGLAND summary manner," etc., etc. In Section 6 of the Act there is a proviso that " nothing in this Act shall be construed to abridge or diminish the undoubted prerogative of His Majesty for the public safety to resort to the exercise of martial law against open enemies or traitors."38 In another statute, 43 Geo. Ill, c. 117, there is a reservation of this " undoubted prerogative " ; and a similar reservation finds place in the act known as the Insurrection Act, 3 & 4 Will. IV, c. 4 (1833) ; S. 40 of this Act lays down that none of its provisions shall be cons­ trued " to take away, abridge, or diminish the undoubted prerogative of His Majesty for the public safety to resort to the exercise of martial law against open enemies or traitors."37 The prerogative right of the Crown to issue proclamations of martial law has been a closely debated matter, and great legal talents have been arrayed, on either side in this behalf. But on a balance of authority it would seem that the Crown does not have any dis­ cretionary authority in this matter, and martial law in England has a completely different connotation as
etc., etc. In Section 6 of the Act there is a proviso that " nothing in this Act shall be construed to abridge or diminish the undoubted prerogative of His Majesty for the public safety to resort to the exercise of martial law against open enemies or traitors."38 In another statute, 43 Geo. Ill, c. 117, there is a reservation of this " undoubted prerogative " ; and a similar reservation finds place in the act known as the Insurrection Act, 3 & 4 Will. IV, c. 4 (1833) ; S. 40 of this Act lays down that none of its provisions shall be cons­ trued " to take away, abridge, or diminish the undoubted prerogative of His Majesty for the public safety to resort to the exercise of martial law against open enemies or traitors."37 The prerogative right of the Crown to issue proclamations of martial law has been a closely debated matter, and great legal talents have been arrayed, on either side in this behalf. But on a balance of authority it would seem that the Crown does not have any dis­ cretionary authority in this matter, and martial law in England has a completely different connotation as would presently appear from a consideration of its real nature and scope. It may, however, be worthwhile to consider a few leading authorities on this question in order to have a clearer view of it. The opinion was held in the 18th century that the Crown could exercise boundless authority during emergency for the preservation of the State. In 1739 Lord Hardwicke stated the position thus: " By the very nature of our Constitution, the Crown has during the recess of Parliament, a sort of dictatorial power to take care c ne quid detriment respublica capiat' ; and in consequence of this power, both by sea and land, if it should become absolutely necessary, and he may concert such measures as any sudden exigency may require, without a previous authority from Parliament for that purpose."38 A similar opinion was voiced by his son Charles Yorke in 1754. He said: " If I rightly understand what is meant by prerogative, it is a power always lodged by our Constitution in the Crown, something like that power given by the Roman Republic to their Consuls upon any sudden and dangerous emergency, ( ut dent operam ne quid respublica detrimeuti capiat' Accord­ ing to this opinion when it becomes necessary for the 36. Stephen, p. 210; Holdsworth, p. 126. 37. Ibid. 38. Parliamentary Hist. X, 1384; Holdsworth, W.S,, A History of English Law, p. 366. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute fc.B. TOWABI 81 public safety to exercise any act of power, not warranted by our statute or common law, and the emergency is so sudden, and the danger so pressing, as to admit of no delay, the king may then exercise that act of power by virtue of his preroga­ tive." 39 It is again in this perspective of prerogative that Lord Camden in 1778 accepted the legality of the proclamation of 1776 which sanc­ tioned an embargo on all ships. The circumstances leading to the embargo were that harvest had failed throughout Europe; it was feared that the consequence might be a famine in the Kingdom; and Parliament was not in session then, and there was no possibility of its being so, within the next forty days. The Council was called and it was decided that a proclamation be issued laying an embargo on all shipping and thus stopping any export of corn from England.40 In this connection Lord Camden makes the following remark: " I looked upon it as a case of necessity which justifies the internal position of the prerogative between the laws and the people ; a right I shall ever maintain the constitu­ tional exercise of.... As soon as Parliament met an in­ demnity was proposed; for my part I was against it; because I thought it unnecessary... .The issuing of the proclamation was a strictly justifiable act of prerogative, an act of prero­ gative not only warranted by particular necessity, but supported upon general principles. "u The position of the Crown in regard to the measures to be taken in connection with an emergency is an outgrowth of a mistaken view held by the lawyers in the 18th and the 19th centuries that the Crown by virtue of its prerogative had a " reserve of power "4* to deal with national -emergency. This view led to another, under which it was claimed by these lawyers that the Crown in order to meet the emer­ gency could proclaim martial law. Once the proclamation of martial law was made, the Crown could adopt any measures to meet the situation. The logical consequence of this proclamation was that there would be an unlimited reserve of power in the hands of the Crown, which could be used without any let or hindrance. It would not then be open to any one to challenge the exercise of this power nor would it be necessary to justify it by means of an act of indem- 39. Ibid. 40. Ibid. 41. Parliamentary Hist. XIX 12474248; Holdsworth, History of English Law, p. 365. 42. Holdsworth, op. cit., p. 709. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute 82 MAHTIAL LAW tt* ENfctANfc nity. It is this sweeping display of authority at the discretion of one individual, however strategically and highly placed in the polity of the country, which has been denied by the Petition of Right and challeng­ ed by legal authorities at the bar of judicial and public opinion. Lord Mansfield exposed the fallacy of this argument when he gave his opinion in connection with the Gorden Riots of 1790.4S He denied that the King, " in the orders he gave respecting the riots, acted merely upon his prerogative, as being entrusted with the protection and the preservation of the State, in ca&es arising out of necessity, and not provided for in the ordinary contemplation
would be an unlimited reserve of power in the hands of the Crown, which could be used without any let or hindrance. It would not then be open to any one to challenge the exercise of this power nor would it be necessary to justify it by means of an act of indem- 39. Ibid. 40. Ibid. 41. Parliamentary Hist. XIX 12474248; Holdsworth, History of English Law, p. 365. 42. Holdsworth, op. cit., p. 709. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute 82 MAHTIAL LAW tt* ENfctANfc nity. It is this sweeping display of authority at the discretion of one individual, however strategically and highly placed in the polity of the country, which has been denied by the Petition of Right and challeng­ ed by legal authorities at the bar of judicial and public opinion. Lord Mansfield exposed the fallacy of this argument when he gave his opinion in connection with the Gorden Riots of 1790.4S He denied that the King, " in the orders he gave respecting the riots, acted merely upon his prerogative, as being entrusted with the protection and the preservation of the State, in ca&es arising out of necessity, and not provided for in the ordinary contemplation and execution of law."44 The question then is, what is the law in England regarding the power of the government to act in the time of an emergency which may arise due to a riot, rebellion or invasion, and where does the power to take speedy action in such a case or situation reside ? It is necessary in this connection, therefore, to understand the prevail­ ing view which underlies the legal position in this behalf. Martial law is one of the weapons in the hands of the * executive arm of the government which ordinarily helps it in overcoming serious disorders which might ensue from any of the situations mentioned above which would warrant a state of emergency. The very safety of the State may be in danger. Even a riot may be so serious that unless nipped in the bud, it might assume an ugly character and grow into a rebellion, for, in the words of W.S. Holdsworth, "rebel­ lion is but riot ' writ large.' "45 In this connection, therefore, it may not be out of place to refer to the charge of Tindal C.J. to the Bristol Grand Jury,46 in which he summed up the position in clear and precise terms. He emphasized that there was ample'provision in the law of England for preventing riotous and disorderly meetings, and also for prompt and effectual suppression of them whenever they showed their ugly head. He then elaborated the sources of this legal authority and said : " by common law every private person may lawfully endea­ vour, of his own authority, and without any warrant or sanc­ tion of the magistrate, to suppress a riot by every means in his power." He then proceeds to say: " not only has he the authority, but it is his bound en duty as 43. Ibid. 706. 44. Ibid. 707. 45. WL.Q.R.,p. 129. 46. 5 C. & P 261; Keir & Lawson Cases in Constitutional Law, 1933, p. 359. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute tt.B. tEWAttt 83 a good subject of the king, to perform this to the utmost of his ability. If the riot be general and dangerous, he may arm himself against the evil-doers to keep the peace."47 He favors the view that the citizen, while performing this duty, acts in concert with the magistrate in order to avoid a disjointed and uncoordinated action, but where the situation has so deteriorated that this direction and orders of the magistrate is not available, he must " act for himself and upon his own responsibility."48 He does* not, in this connection, draw any distinction between a citizen and a soldier: " The soldier is still a citizen, lying under the same obliga­ tion and invested with the same authority to preserve the peace of the king as any other subject. If the one is bound to attend the call of the civil magistrate, so also is the other ; if the one may interfere for that purpose when the occasion demands it, without the requisition of the magistrate, so may the other too ; if the one may employ arms for that purpose, when arms are necessary, the soldier may do the same. "49 It is apparent from these recitations that a duty is cast on the citizen and the soldier alike to act under the direction and command of the magistrate wherever and whenever possible in order to keep the peace and protect the State from subversign. But where the circum­ stances are such that due to chaos and existing peril to the safety of the State such direction and command from the magistracy of the country cannot be obtained, both the citizen and the soldier are free to take the initiative in their own hands and do everything possible to protect the society from subversion. It is not only in their discretion to do so, but there is a duty on them to act, and they will be answerable before the counts of law if lChey failed to act in such circumstances.50 If in the discharge of this onerous duty, they did commit some excess, they would be protected by the common law, unless malice or negligence is proved on their part.51 " And he may be assured ", says Tindal C. J. in his charge to the Bristol Grand Jury, already referred * to, " that whatever is honestly done by him in the execution of that object will be supported and justified by the common law."52 It is out of this common law obligation that arises the duty 47. Ibid. 360. * 48. /^/.360. 49. K & L (1933), pp. 360-361. 50. Ibid. 51. Ibid. 52. Ibid. p. 360. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute 84 MARTIAL LAW IN EKGLAND of "every sheriff, constable, and
direction and command from the magistracy of the country cannot be obtained, both the citizen and the soldier are free to take the initiative in their own hands and do everything possible to protect the society from subversion. It is not only in their discretion to do so, but there is a duty on them to act, and they will be answerable before the counts of law if lChey failed to act in such circumstances.50 If in the discharge of this onerous duty, they did commit some excess, they would be protected by the common law, unless malice or negligence is proved on their part.51 " And he may be assured ", says Tindal C. J. in his charge to the Bristol Grand Jury, already referred * to, " that whatever is honestly done by him in the execution of that object will be supported and justified by the common law."52 It is out of this common law obligation that arises the duty 47. Ibid. 360. * 48. /^/.360. 49. K & L (1933), pp. 360-361. 50. Ibid. 51. Ibid. 52. Ibid. p. 360. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute 84 MARTIAL LAW IN EKGLAND of "every sheriff, constable, and other peace officer," to do all that lies in his power for the suppression of riot and the restoration of peace. This obligation invests him with the power to summon the help and assistance of every other citizen, and the citizen has no other choice but to render assistance according to his capacity and resource.53 Any infringement of this duty is punishable under the law.64 Littledale J. in his summing up, in Rex v. Pinney,55 reinforced these views when he said: " a party intrusted with the duty of putting down a riot, whether by virtue of an office of his own seeking (as in the ordinary case of a magistrate), or imposed upon him (as in that of a constable), was bound to hit the exact line between excess and failure of duty, though it might be some ground for a lenient consideration of his conduct on the part of the jury, was no legal defense to a charge like the present. Nor could a party so charged excuse himself on the mere ground of honest intention."5* If the principle of law enunciated above by Tindal C.J. and, emphasized by Littledale J. is borne in mind, it will be easy to com­ prehend the intricate legal channels through which the doctrine of martial law has moved and ultimately has been accepted as an im­ portant constitutional principle under the English legal system. It should not, therefore, unduly alarm the students of English consti­ tutional law to find an authority like A.V. Dicey declare that " Martial law, in the proper sense of that term in which it means the suspension of the ordinary law and the temporary government of a country or parts of it by military tribunals, is unknown to the law of England."57 What Dicey means by this assertion is that the proclamation of martial law in the sense in which a county or a district is governed by military tribunals, which supersede the jurisdiction of the courts, is foreign to the law of England. There is nothing like the state of siegfe in France under which the authority for the maintenance of law and order passes to the military, during an insurrection or rebellion, and the guarantees of the Constitution are suspended for that 53. See 13 Hen. 4, c. 7; K & L„ p. 361; 1 & 2 Will. 4, c. 41; 1 Geo. 1, st. 2. c. 5, the statute usually known as the Riot Act. 54. Reg. v. Brown, (1841), Car. & M. 314; K & L p. 364. 55. 3 St. Tr. (n.x) 11; K & L, Cases in Const. Law, p. 363; Forsyth, Cases and Opinions, p. 213. 56. Ibid. 57. Dicey, Law of the Constitution, 8th ed. (1915), p. 283. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute fc.*. TBWAS1 85 period.58 But martial law is used in another* sense in England, and the use of the doctrine in this sense, Dicey fully recognizes.69 Dicey builds upon the doctrine of R. v. Pinney,60 and proceeds to observe that if martial law is " employed as a name for the com­ mon law right of the Crown and its servants to repel force by force in the case of< invasion, insurrection, riot, or generally any violent resistance to the law," it is " most assuredly recognised .... by the law of England."61 Martial law is an extreme remedy which can be employed by the executive authority in the event of a rebellion or imminent danger to the safety of the State. It connotes " a particular system of legal relations which arise between the military and civilian subjects of the king in time of insurrection or civil war."62 The military commander assumes the power to administer law as the civil authority comes to a halt due to disturbed conditions in the realm or any part thereof. This assumption of power by the military commander arises when emergency necessitates the restoration of peace and order, which has been threatened by insurrection, civil war, or invasion by a foreign enemy. The legal basis of this authority in the military commander has been a subject of inconclusive controversy. According to Professor Dicey and some other eminent authori­ ties63 it arises out of necessity and the basis ^f the authority is com­ mon law. This authority is inherent in every other political system and arises from the right of self-preservation.64 Each citizen as well as every soldier in England has not only the right but the duty to take up arms and do every other thing to preserve the State and the society. It is advisable to act under the command of the authorities,65 but it is permissible to take independent action where the situation has so deteriorated that it Is not possible to take orders^ from
the military and civilian subjects of the king in time of insurrection or civil war."62 The military commander assumes the power to administer law as the civil authority comes to a halt due to disturbed conditions in the realm or any part thereof. This assumption of power by the military commander arises when emergency necessitates the restoration of peace and order, which has been threatened by insurrection, civil war, or invasion by a foreign enemy. The legal basis of this authority in the military commander has been a subject of inconclusive controversy. According to Professor Dicey and some other eminent authori­ ties63 it arises out of necessity and the basis ^f the authority is com­ mon law. This authority is inherent in every other political system and arises from the right of self-preservation.64 Each citizen as well as every soldier in England has not only the right but the duty to take up arms and do every other thing to preserve the State and the society. It is advisable to act under the command of the authorities,65 but it is permissible to take independent action where the situation has so deteriorated that it Is not possible to take orders^ from the authorities. The compelling reason for this is that the society and the State must be preserved, whatever cost in blood and property it might entail, for 58. Ibid. pp. 283-284. 59. Ibid. 284. 60. Supra, note 55. 61. Dicey, p. 284 62. K & L, Cases in Const. Law (1933), p. 368. 63. Dicey, Law of the Constitution, 8th ed. (1915), n. X., p. 539. Similar views are expressed by^ Comyns, Hargrave, Lord Loughborough, Stephen, Pollock, Sir $avid Dundas, Campbell Rolfe, Mackintosh, and Holdsworth. See Holds- worth, History of English Law, vol. IX, pp. 708-709; Forsyth, Cases and Opinions, 1869, p. 551 and pp. 204*206. 64. Forsyth, p. 563. 65. Dicey, c. viii. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute 86 ttA&TUL LAW XH ENGLAND peace and order are the sine qua non of social action and survival of the State. It is an accepted legal axiom in England now that in the face of violence and subversion every citizen has a common law right to use force against force. The principle underlying this right is an extension of the right of self-defense which inheres in. every citizen. Every citizen as well as soldier and sheriff has a right as well as a duty to use force in order to preserve peace. On the wider area of national defense, this principle applies with equal force and authority to the executive and the military. And organized violence like a rebellion or an invasion must be met by the combined resources of the govern­ ment and the citizen. It is in such a circumstance that the common law allows the use of force by the military forces of the State and take all other steps which might be necessary to avert the danger. Martial law is one such means at the disposal of the military authori­ ties which they employ to fight chaos and subversion. Necessity alone justifies taking of those measures which in the normal conditions would be trespass, and thus unlawful. But as Professor Dicey points out, necessity again justifies the continuance of these extraordinary measures. While, therefore, necessity lasts there should be no interference with the exercise of these powers by the military authorities and they should be left unhampered in the pursuit of the task by the judicial and civil branches of the government. It is, however, necessary to define the limits of military action and their relations with the judiciary during the period of the emergency at a subsequent stage of this enquiry. The difference between this common law right of the citizen, the soldier and the executive to take necessary action to preserve the State and the society," and the prerogative right of the Crown to en­ force martial law by proclamation is this: In the former case, there are certain inherent limitations within which every one has to act and operate. They have to take all the steps necessary for fight­ ing ihe emergency, but no more. The promulgation of martial law interferes with the fundamental liberties of the people. The consti­ tutional guarantees of the citizen are" suspended for the period of the emergency. This amounts to an invasion of the cherished rights of the people which is suffered only because there looms a greater emergency which might put an end to these rights forever, if steps are not taken to nip it in the bud. But when the emergency is over every one is accountable for any excesses or undue invasion of the rights of the people. It is right to say that a person acting under the pressure of www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute ft.B. SfiWAfit 87 an invasion or a rebellion may not be expected to balance each step with consummate prudence lest he might tread on some one else's constitutional right or liberty. But one has surely to exercise a balance between " excess and failure of duty,"66 for, he will be answerable for anything done unjustifiably or maliciously, after the emergency is over. It is, therefore, necessary to pass an Act of Indemnity granting them immunity from indictment or action for any excesses during the period of emergency. In the latter case, however, the Crown is free to sanction" or authorize any measures for any period of time to meet the emergency. A mere proclamation is enough to introduce ex­ traordinary measures suspending the guarantees of the Constitution and legalizing any action. No Act of Indemnity is subsequently necessary to grant exemption from criminal or civil responsibility to those who might be deemed guilty of any excesses during the period of emer­ gency. But since promulgation of martial law by prerogative au­ thority is denied in England by an overwhelming array of authority,67 it is submitted that the only basis for introducing mar­ tial law in England today
Indian Law Institute ft.B. SfiWAfit 87 an invasion or a rebellion may not be expected to balance each step with consummate prudence lest he might tread on some one else's constitutional right or liberty. But one has surely to exercise a balance between " excess and failure of duty,"66 for, he will be answerable for anything done unjustifiably or maliciously, after the emergency is over. It is, therefore, necessary to pass an Act of Indemnity granting them immunity from indictment or action for any excesses during the period of emergency. In the latter case, however, the Crown is free to sanction" or authorize any measures for any period of time to meet the emergency. A mere proclamation is enough to introduce ex­ traordinary measures suspending the guarantees of the Constitution and legalizing any action. No Act of Indemnity is subsequently necessary to grant exemption from criminal or civil responsibility to those who might be deemed guilty of any excesses during the period of emer­ gency. But since promulgation of martial law by prerogative au­ thority is denied in England by an overwhelming array of authority,67 it is submitted that the only basis for introducing mar­ tial law in England today is the common law and inherent right of self-preservation based on the doctrine of necessity.68 It is in this sense Dicey says that "martial law" is used in England.69 It is this basis of martial law which finds support in the opinion of Sir J. Campbell and Sir R.M. Rolfe. "The right of resor­ ting to such an extremity," they point out, "is a right arising from and limited by necessity of the case—quod necessitas cogit, defendit."10 This view also echoes an opinion of Sir James Mackintosh:71 66. Littledale J. in R. v. Pinney, K & L., p. 363. 67. Supra, note 63. 68. Proclamation of martial law by means of an Order-in-Council does not accord any special legal sanction to the exercise of function under martial law. A proclamation is merely a notice to the public that a certain state of facts exist. But the proclamation does not render legal those acts which would not be lawful if the Order-in-Council were not issued or the proclamation of martial law were not made. See Pollock, 18 L.Q.R., p. 155-56. Sir David Dundas says in connection with martial law in Ceylon: "^The proclamation of martial law is a notice, to all those to whom the proclamation is addressed, that there is another measure of law and another mode of proceeding than there was before that proclamation." Forsyth, p. 558. See to the same effect opinion of Stephen in Governor Eyre's case. Forsyth, p. 559. 69. Dfcey, Law of the Constitution, 8th ed. n. x., p. 539-540. Ibid., p. 540; Forsyth, p. 206; K & L, p. 383. 70. Ibid. Forsyth, p. 201s; Dicey, p. 540 "martial law is merely a cession of all municipal law, and what necessity requires it justifies." 71. Dicey, citing from Clode, Military Forces of the Crown, vol. ii p. 486, at p. 541. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute 88 MAMUL UWIN ENGLAND "The only principle on which the law of England tolerates what is called martial law is necessity; its continuance requires precisely the same justification of necessity; and if it survives the necessity on which alone it rests for a single minute, it becomes instantly a mere exercise of lawless violence." A leading case on the subject of martial law on trial by military courts, in which the question came up whether, when civil courts were open and unobstructed in the performance of their functions, persons, particularly civilianss could be tried by courts-martial or military tribunals is the trial of Theobald Wolfe Tone.72 The circumstances leading to this trial were briefly these. In May, 1798, owing to the disturbed conditions in Ireland, the Lord Lieutenant (Lord Camden) issued a proclamation of martial law, which was put into force and many persons were executed under it. In November of the same year Wolfe Tone, an Irish resident, and formerly a member of the Irish bar,73 who had gone over to France to procure French help for the liberation of Ireland, was captured by Sir John Borlase Warren's squadron on board The Hochc, French line of battleship, off the Irish coast. The prisoner was brought to trial by court-martial in Dublin, on the 10th of November, 1798.7* Mr. Tone was implicated, being a natural born subject of the English king, for traitorously entering into the service of the French Republic, which was at open war with the English government. He was charged for bearing arms against his king and country, and for assuming a command in the army of an enemy, which was on way to invading Ireland. He was also charged with the offence of acting in open resistance to His Majesty's forces, with several other charges of a treasonable nature.75 The prisoner admitted "the whole charge exhibited against him."76 But he made a request to the military court to the effect that he be accorded "the death of a soldier, and to be shot by a file of grenadiers."77 72. Lowry, James Moody, Martial Law within the Realm of England, 1914, pp. 28-29; XXVII State Trials, p. 613. 73. XXVII St. Tr„ pp. 615-16. 74. Ibid, see life of Curran by his son, vol. 2, p. 154*58. 75. XXVII St. Tr„ p. 617. 76. Ibid. It is neither necessary nor relevant to go into details of the statements which the prisoner sought and was suffered to make before the tribunal in justi­ fication of his activities. For details see, XXVII St Tr. p. 617. 77. Ibid. pp. 621-622. He said: "This is the only favour I ask; and I trust that men, susceptible of the nice feelings of a soldier's honour, will not refuse the request." www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute B.B. TBWABI 89 The sentence of the court awaited the determination of the Lord Lieutenant, who subsequently confirmed the sentence of death
acting in open resistance to His Majesty's forces, with several other charges of a treasonable nature.75 The prisoner admitted "the whole charge exhibited against him."76 But he made a request to the military court to the effect that he be accorded "the death of a soldier, and to be shot by a file of grenadiers."77 72. Lowry, James Moody, Martial Law within the Realm of England, 1914, pp. 28-29; XXVII State Trials, p. 613. 73. XXVII St. Tr„ pp. 615-16. 74. Ibid, see life of Curran by his son, vol. 2, p. 154*58. 75. XXVII St. Tr„ p. 617. 76. Ibid. It is neither necessary nor relevant to go into details of the statements which the prisoner sought and was suffered to make before the tribunal in justi­ fication of his activities. For details see, XXVII St Tr. p. 617. 77. Ibid. pp. 621-622. He said: "This is the only favour I ask; and I trust that men, susceptible of the nice feelings of a soldier's honour, will not refuse the request." www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute B.B. TBWABI 89 The sentence of the court awaited the determination of the Lord Lieutenant, who subsequently confirmed the sentence of death passed on him by the court-martial, but did not accede to the request of the prisoner already referred to. He was to suffer death in "the most pubic manner for the sake of striking example."78 The prisoner could not bear the prospect of "such a torrent of public ignominy."79 He therefore cut his throat with a pen-knife. But it was detected before he could succumb to it. The wound was dressed, bringing a brief recess "till the fatal hour of one O'clock appointed for execution."80 In the meanwhile a motion was made in the Court of the King's Bench by Mr. Curran, on an affidavit of Tone's father, stating that his son had been brought before a bench of officers, calling itself a court-martial, and by them sentenced to death.81 In presenting the application, Mr. Gurran, the counsel for the petitioner, said that he did not pretend to say that Mr. Tone was not guilty of the charges of which he was accused, but on the basis of the affidavit he' contended that Mr. Tone had no commission in the army of the king, and as such, "no court-martial could have cognizance of any crime imputed to him, while the Court of King's Bench sat in the capacity of the Great criminal court of the land."82 He went on to say that "in times when war was raging, when man was opposed to man in the field, court-martial might be endured/' but he contended vehemently that "martial law and civil law are incompatible; and the former must cease with the existence of the latter."83 The motion failed to achieve the desired result, as, despite the best efforts of the Court, the writ of habeas corpus could not be served and the prisoner brought to the Court on account of the prisoner having died of the wounds he had received in an attempt to cut his own throat.8* The two most important issues therefore could not be 78. XXVII St. Tr, p. 623. 79. Ibid. 80.. Ibid. '81. Ibid. p. 624-5. 82. Ibid. p. 625. 83. Ibid. p. 625. 84. It may be interesting to record tile proceedings of the Court of King's Bench in th^| case after Mr. Curran requested that a habeas corpus be directed against the Provost Marshal or the barracks of Dublin, and Major Sandys to bring up the body of Mr. Tone. Lord Chief Justice (Kilwarden)—Have a writ instantly prepared. Mr, Curran—My client may die while this writ is preparing. Lord Chief Justice—Mr. Sheriff, proceed to the barracks, and acquaint the www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute 90 MARTIAL LAW IK ENGLAND adjudicated upon in this case, namely, whether a court-martial could proceed against a person who was not commissioned in the army of the king, and whether military tribunals could try civilians when the civil courts were functioning in the realm. These points, therefore, remained unanswered till the decision of the Privy Council in ex parte, D.F. Marais.85 The case of ex parte, D.F. Marais is one of the most important decisions of the Privy Council on the subject of martial law. The facts briefly were that the petitioner was arrested on August 15, 1901, by the chief constable of the town of Pearl, about thirty five miles from Cape Town. The constable had no warrant, but stated that he acted on instructions from the military authorities. The petitioner was removed about three hundred miles on August 18, to the town of Beaufort West, and detained in custody there. He petitioned the Supreme Court at Cape Town on September 6 for his release on the ground that his arrest was contrary to the fundamental liberties secured to the subjects of His Majesty. It appeared from an affidavit sworn by the gaoler of Beaufort West that the petkioner was Provost Marshal that a writ is preparing to suspend Mr. Tone's execution; and see that he be not executed. (The Court awaited, in a state of the utmost agitation the return of the sheriff.) Mr. Sheriff—My lords, I have been at the barracks in pursuance of your order. The Provost-Marshal says he must obey Major Sandys. Major Sandys says he must obey lord Cornwallis. Mr. Curran—Mr. Tone's father, my lords, returns, after serving the Habeas Corpus: he says General Craig will not obey it. Mr. Sheriff, take the body of Tone into your custody. Take the provost-marshal and Major Sandys into custody: and show the order of this Court to General Craig. Mr. Sheriff (who was understood to have been refused admittance at the barracks) returns.—I have been at the barracks. Mr. Tone having cut his throat last night, is not in a condition to be removed. As to the second $art of your order I could not meet the parties. (A French emigrant Surgeon, whom General
ground that his arrest was contrary to the fundamental liberties secured to the subjects of His Majesty. It appeared from an affidavit sworn by the gaoler of Beaufort West that the petkioner was Provost Marshal that a writ is preparing to suspend Mr. Tone's execution; and see that he be not executed. (The Court awaited, in a state of the utmost agitation the return of the sheriff.) Mr. Sheriff—My lords, I have been at the barracks in pursuance of your order. The Provost-Marshal says he must obey Major Sandys. Major Sandys says he must obey lord Cornwallis. Mr. Curran—Mr. Tone's father, my lords, returns, after serving the Habeas Corpus: he says General Craig will not obey it. Mr. Sheriff, take the body of Tone into your custody. Take the provost-marshal and Major Sandys into custody: and show the order of this Court to General Craig. Mr. Sheriff (who was understood to have been refused admittance at the barracks) returns.—I have been at the barracks. Mr. Tone having cut his throat last night, is not in a condition to be removed. As to the second $art of your order I could not meet the parties. (A French emigrant Surgeon, whom General Craig had sent along with the Sheriff, was sworn) Surgeon—I was sent to attend Mr. Tone this morning at four O'clock, his wind­ pipe was divided. I took instant measures to secure his life, by closing the wound. There is no knowing for four days, whether it will be mortal. His head is now kept in one position. A sentinel is over him to prevent his speaking. His removal would kill him. Mr. Curran applied for further surgical aid, and for the admission of Mr. Tone's friends to him. (^Refused.) Lord Chief Justice—Let a rule be made for suspending the execution of X^eobald Wolfe Tone; and let it be served on the proper persons. (The prisoner lingered until the 19th day of November, when he expired, after having endured in the interval the most excrutiating pain). See XXVII St. Tr. pp. 625-626; 2 Life of Curran 166, note. 85, [1902] A,C, 109, www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute B.B. TEWAEI 91 detained under the orders of the military authorities, which was dated September 8. The alleged cause of the arrest was contra­ vention of martial law regulations.86 The Supreme Court at Cape Town, speaking through Buchanan J. refused the petition. The grounds for the refusal were that martial law had been proclaimed in the districts both of the Pearl and of Beaufort West, and that the Court ought not to go into the necessity of that proclamation nor accept any responsibility for the acts of the military authorities performed in pursuance of it. The decision clearly pointed out the Court's inability to do anything as long as martial law lasted.87 Marais appealed to the Privy Council but the appeal was dismissed. The reasons for the refusal to grant the petition were given by the Lord Chancellor, Lord Halsbury. At the outset he held that both the districts, the one in which the petitioner's arrest took place and the other to which he was removed, were under martial law. The main point for consideration, as urged by the petitioner, was whether, when some of the courts were open, it was impossible to apply the ordinary rule that where actual war is raging the civil courts have no jurisdiction to deal with military action, but where acts of war are in question the military tribunals alone are competent to deal with such questions.88 The Privy Council laid down in unmistakable terms that: 'They are of opinion that where actual war is raging acts done by military authorities are not justiciable by the ordinary tribunals, and that war in t,his case was actual­ ly raging, even if their Lordships did not take judicial notice of it, is sufficiently evidenced by the facts disclosed by the'petitioner's own petition and affidavit."89 They refused to countenance the fact that since some courts were open, there was no war raging at that time. In their own words: "The fact that for some purposes some tribunals had been permitted to pursue their ordinary course is not con­ clusive that war was not raging."90 The Lord Chancellor referred in this connection to the earlier decision of the Judicial Committee in Elphinstone v. Bedreechand91 and 86. Ibid, at 110. 87. Ibid, at 110. 88. [1902] A.C. 109, at 114. 89. Ibid. 90. Ibid. 91. (1830), 1 Knapp p.c. 316; 2 St. Tr. N.S. (1830) p. 379. Refer to the opinion of Lord Tenterden, C. J., cited in [1902] A.C, p. 115, www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute 92 MAETIAL LAW IK ENGLAND came to the conclusion: "Where war actually prevails the ordinary courts have no jurisdiction over the action of the military authorities."92 The Lord Chancellor did not pause to lay down any rule as to the determination of the fact of war, that is, whether or not the civil courts were competent to determine whether war was in exis­ tence or not. But he did add the cryptic statement that the question of the severity of the steps taken by the military may arise, but did not add to it the necessary explanation as to who w6uld determine the questions involved in the proposition. He rather added to the complexity of the matter in his further remarks when he said: "but once let the fact of actual war be established, and there is an universal consensus of opinion that the civil courts have no jurisdiction to call in question the propriety of the action of military authorities."93 This decision as it comes from the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council deserves serious consideration. The pronouncements of the Judicial Committee although in form are merely reports to the Sovereign of England from appeals in cases from the overseas empire and dominions, yet in effect they have all the attributes of a decision from the highest court of appeal in the
the military authorities."92 The Lord Chancellor did not pause to lay down any rule as to the determination of the fact of war, that is, whether or not the civil courts were competent to determine whether war was in exis­ tence or not. But he did add the cryptic statement that the question of the severity of the steps taken by the military may arise, but did not add to it the necessary explanation as to who w6uld determine the questions involved in the proposition. He rather added to the complexity of the matter in his further remarks when he said: "but once let the fact of actual war be established, and there is an universal consensus of opinion that the civil courts have no jurisdiction to call in question the propriety of the action of military authorities."93 This decision as it comes from the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council deserves serious consideration. The pronouncements of the Judicial Committee although in form are merely reports to the Sovereign of England from appeals in cases from the overseas empire and dominions, yet in effect they have all the attributes of a decision from the highest court of appeal in the empire. They do not have a legally binding effect, yet they will not be ordinarily ignored by the British judiciary.94 It is, therefore, not out of place to examine briefly the various issues which found their solution in this case, a few others which remained unanswered, and some which gave rise to further complications and controversies without providing a clear answer for themselves. An analysis of the decision reveals two propositions worth noticing at this point.95 The first is: Where actual war is. raging, acts done by the military authorities are not justiciable by the ordi­ nary tribunals. The second proposition is: The fact that for some purposes some tribunals have been permitted to pursue their ordinary course is not conclusive that war is not raging. 92. [1902] A.C, p. 115. 93. [1902] A.C, 109 at 115. 94. See Cyril Dodd, "The Case of Marais", (1902) .18 L. Q.R. p. 14-3 : He says : "Any decision of the Privy Council is not limited to the particular occasion or to the particular place, but extends to the whole of the dominions of the Crown beyond the sea." See also, Pollock, "What is Martial Law," 18 L.Q.R., 158. 95. The controversy regarding Petition of Right has been noticed elsewhere. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute B.B. TBWAB1 93 As regards the first proposition, it must be said that it is open to serious criticism.96 It places in the hands of the military authorities a weapon which, as it is kept out of the vigilance of the courts, is capable of grave misuse. If this proposition is intended to apply to the facts of the present case, which does not appear from the judgment at all, it may be less open to criticism. But if the intention of the Privy Council was, as seems to be the case, to lay down the broad proposition that military authorities cannot be held answerable for their acts, however arbitrary and unwarranted by the necessity of the situation, then it is much beyond the scope of the recognized law.97 It has been held by high judicial authorities that proclamation of martial law by itself is no proof of the existence of necessity. It puts the citizen on notice that a situation of that kind has arisen in which measures of martial law have become necessary. "Proof of actual war does not exempt the soldier from all liability to answer after the war for all acts done during war.*'98 As regards the power of the courts to inquire into the acts of the military authorities, it would appear that the modern view is against such exclusion. They have the jurisdiction to inquire about the fact of the necessity.99 It would also depend on whether or not they are able to function freely and for all purposes, or on the other hand they are allowed to function on a limited basis by the permission and under the protection of the military authorities.1 In the latter case, it is true their authority will be limited.2 But if they are functioning in the normal way in their own right, it is not correct to say that they have no jurisdiction over the acts of the military authorities. It is another matter that situated as they might be in the particular situation obtaining at the moment, their authority may be flouted by the military authorities, but nonethe­ less, they retain the jurisdiction to inquire into the acts of the military personnel after the war is over, and are always free to enquire whether the necessity of war or emergency did exist to justify the measures taken.3 Taking the second proposition regarding the open court rule, it is now agreed that it no longer holds good in the present context. 96. 18 L.Q..R., pp. 148-151, 157-8. 97. Wright v. Fitzgerald (1799), 27 S$. Tr. 759, 765 . 98. Dodd, "The Case of Marais'*, 18 L.Q.R. p. 149. 99. Ibitk, p. 145: K*& L Cases, (1933), p. 383 opis. Campbell Rote. 1. 18L.Q,.R„ 149. 2. See Hawaiian Martial Law case, K & L. p. 372; See 2 I.R, p. 326, Molony C.J. in protest. 3. Sterling v. Constantin, 287 U.S. 378 (1932) ; Wright v. Fitzgerald, (1799), 27 St, Tr. 759. See Molony, C.J, in R. v, Strickland, (1921) 2 I.R, 317 at p. 329. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute 94 MARTIAL LAW IN ENGLAND When the rule was enunciated and accepted as an axiom of law, justice was in a large measure based on legal fictions. These fictions do not exist in the present time. It would be injurious to society and the State to ignore the hard facts of war and insurrection, and cling to fictions and formulaes of a bygone age when modern scientific knowledge and technological developments have
to justify the measures taken.3 Taking the second proposition regarding the open court rule, it is now agreed that it no longer holds good in the present context. 96. 18 L.Q..R., pp. 148-151, 157-8. 97. Wright v. Fitzgerald (1799), 27 S$. Tr. 759, 765 . 98. Dodd, "The Case of Marais'*, 18 L.Q.R. p. 149. 99. Ibitk, p. 145: K*& L Cases, (1933), p. 383 opis. Campbell Rote. 1. 18L.Q,.R„ 149. 2. See Hawaiian Martial Law case, K & L. p. 372; See 2 I.R, p. 326, Molony C.J. in protest. 3. Sterling v. Constantin, 287 U.S. 378 (1932) ; Wright v. Fitzgerald, (1799), 27 St, Tr. 759. See Molony, C.J, in R. v, Strickland, (1921) 2 I.R, 317 at p. 329. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute 94 MARTIAL LAW IN ENGLAND When the rule was enunciated and accepted as an axiom of law, justice was in a large measure based on legal fictions. These fictions do not exist in the present time. It would be injurious to society and the State to ignore the hard facts of war and insurrection, and cling to fictions and formulaes of a bygone age when modern scientific knowledge and technological developments have revolutionized the very concept of warfare. War cannot be said to be non-existent merely because a few triubunals are functioning for certain purposes.4 In this sense, therefore, the present case puts an end to this old rule, which did hold the field for a long time.5 It has been by now a settled law in England that civil courts cannot take cognizance of sentences passed by military courts adminis­ tering martial law. These military tribunals are not treated on a par with the lower civil or criminal courts from whose judgments appeals may lie before higher judicial bodies. They are rather thought to be no courts at all in the eye of the law, and therefore out of the appellate jurisdiction of the higher tribunals. This question came before the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Tilonko v. The Attorney-General of the County of JVatal6 on appeal from a court-martial sitting at Pietermaritzburg, in the country of Natal. This was a petition for special leave to appeal from a judg­ ment of a military tribunal and the sentence following thereon. The petitioner in this case was on July 30, 1906, indicted before a court-martial claiming to sit under a declaration of martial law for 4. See Pollock, "What is Martial Law", 18 L.Q.R., p. 157. He says: "The only point it [ex Parte, Marais] decided, in my opinion, was that the absence of visible disorder and continued sitting of the courts are not conclusive evidence of a state of peace. This, I venture to think, is right " See also, Dodd, "The Case of Marais", 18 L.Q.R^, p. 147. "It was not to be expected that a Committee of the Privy Council should feel bound by any such general rule to the extent of being compelled to hold, contrary to actual fact that war did not exist." 5. 18 L.Q.R. p. 147. In two leading Irish cases, R. v. Allen (1921) 2 Ir. R. 241, and Egan v. Macready, (1921) 1 Ir. R. 265, ex parte, Marais came up for consideration. It was followed in the former case, but in the latter it was distinguished by O'Connor M.R., although the facts were similar in the two cases. He refused to follow ex parte, Marais on the ground that it could not apply to a case where a prisoner had been sentenced to death, and not merely detained by military authorities. See K & L, 1933, p. 378-381. These cases, despite their great legal importance, are not directly in point in an English court as they have no binding effect there. There is only one case which, being a decision of the House of Lords, has such effect, and that is the case of Clifford v. O'Sullivan [1921] 2 A.C. 570, 6. [1907] A.C. 93, www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute fe.fe. TEWA&l 95 the crimes of sedition and violence. The petitioner contended that his trial before the military court was without jurisdiction and illegal. The question, therefore, was whether an appeal could lie from the order of the court-martial. The Judicial Committee disposed of the argument of the counsel for the petitioner that leave could not be refused by asserting that there was no analogy between the proceedings of a military court functioning under the Mutiny Act and the proceedings of martial law which are not constituted under any system of law. Lord Halsbury observed: "It is by this time a very familiar observation that what is called "martial law" is no law at all. The notion that 'martial law' exists by the reason of the proclamation is an entire delusion. The right to administer force against force in actual war does not depend upon the pro­ clamation of martial law at all. It depends upon the question whether there is war or not. If there is war, there is right to repel force by force, but it is found convenient and decorous, from time to time, to authorize what are called 'courts' to administer punishments, and to restrain by acts of repression the violence that is committed in time of war, instead of leaving such punishment and repression to the casual action of persons acting without sufficient consultation, or without sufficient order or regularity in the procedure in which things alleged to have been done are proved."7 The Lord Chancellor denied that these "courts" were in any way similar to the ordinary courts of justice.8 The only justification for these courts and the course they pursued was necessity and war. He, however, conceded that the question may arise regarding the fact of the existence of war itself. But no such question arose in this case, and an Act of Parliament in Natal covered any such anamoly. The Court was bound by the provisions of the Act, and therefore
entire delusion. The right to administer force against force in actual war does not depend upon the pro­ clamation of martial law at all. It depends upon the question whether there is war or not. If there is war, there is right to repel force by force, but it is found convenient and decorous, from time to time, to authorize what are called 'courts' to administer punishments, and to restrain by acts of repression the violence that is committed in time of war, instead of leaving such punishment and repression to the casual action of persons acting without sufficient consultation, or without sufficient order or regularity in the procedure in which things alleged to have been done are proved."7 The Lord Chancellor denied that these "courts" were in any way similar to the ordinary courts of justice.8 The only justification for these courts and the course they pursued was necessity and war. He, however, conceded that the question may arise regarding the fact of the existence of war itself. But no such question arose in this case, and an Act of Parliament in Natal covered any such anamoly. The Court was bound by the provisions of the Act, and therefore had no jurisdiction to review the judgment of the court-martial.9 This case was later followed in Clifford v. 0'Sullivan, 10 by the House of Lords. This was an appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Ireland dismissing an appeal from an order of Powell J. a judge of the Chancery Division of the High Court of Justice in 7. Ibid., pp. 93-94. 8. [1907] A.C. p. 95. 9. Ibid. 10. [1921] 2 A.C, p. 570. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute 96 MARTIAL LAW IN ENGLAND Ireland, who had refused an application by the defendants for a writ of prohibition. The application was made on behalf of the appellants, who were civilians. They were arrested by military forces near Mitchelstown in the county of Cork11 and were found with arms and ammunition in their possession.12 On May, 3, 1921 the appellants were formally charged before certain officers sitting as a military court under the proclamation of December 12, 1920, with being improperly in possession of arms and ammunition. After hearing they were sentenced to death, the sentence being subject to confirmation.13 Upon this, application was made to Powell J. that a writ of prohibition might be issued and directed to the above- mentioned military court and to General Macready and Major- General Strickland to prohibit them from further proceeding with the trial of the appellants, or from pronouncing or confirming any judgment upon the appellants as a result of the trial, or from carrying into execution any such judgment or otherwise interfering with the appellants on the ground that the military court was illegal14 The application was heard and the learned judge, following a decision of a Divisional Court of the King's Bench Division in Ireland in a similar case,15 held on the authority of ex parte, Marais1* that a state of war existed in the above-mentioned counties of Ireland, and that where such a situation obtained the civil courts had no jurisdiction to interfere with the proceedings of the military autho­ rity.17 He, therefore, refused the application. The Court of Appeal, however, refused trie appeal from this order of Powell J. on the ground that they had no jurisdiction to entertain an appeal from a judgment of the High Court "in any criminal cause or-master," under the provi­ sions of s. 50 of the Judicature Act (Ireland).18 The House of Lords held that in order that a case may be a criminal charge or matter it must fulfil two conditions. "It must involve the consideration of some charge of crime, that is to say, of an offense against the public law (Imperial Dictionary, tit. 'Crime' and 'Criminal'); and that charge must have been preferred or be 11. On December 12, 1920, a proclamation was issued whereby martial law was declared in the counties of Cork, Tipperary, Kerry and Limerick. 12. It was an offence punishable with death under the proclamation. 13. By the military commander, 14. [1921] A.C. 578 15. Rex v. Allen, [1921] 2 Ir.R, 241. 16. [1902] A.C. 109. 17. [1921] 2 A.C. 579. 18. Ibid. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute fc.B. TBWAfil 37 about to be preferred before some court or judicial tribunal having or claiming jurisdiction to impose punishment for the offence or alleged offence. If these conditions are fulfilled, the matter may be criminal, even though it is held that no crime has been committed, or that the tribunal has no jurisdiction to deal with it." Applying these criteria to the present case, the Court came to the conclusion that neither of these conditions were fulfilled here.19 They said: "The so-called 'military court,5 whose proceedings were in question before Powell J. was not and did not claim to be a court or judicial tribunal in any legal sense of those terms... They sat, sat not as a tribunal for hearing charges of crime, but as a military committee for considering a matter arising under the pro­ clamation and advising the commanding officer thereon."20 As such their lordships thought that the proceedings before the military tribunal were no criminal proceedings at all. Hence, Powell J. they thought, in reviewing the proceedings of the "so-called military court"21 was not seized of a "criminal cause or matter."22 Therefore, an appeal-would not lie from his decision.23 They further came to the conclusion that a writ of prohibition did not lie, because the military officers who purported to act in this case did not do so as a court in any legal sense of the term.2* The other reason for refusal to issue the writ was that the writ of prohibition directed to the officers would be of no avail as they had long completed their work. The prohibition could also not be granted against Generals Macready and Strikland restraining them from carrying out the
so-called 'military court,5 whose proceedings were in question before Powell J. was not and did not claim to be a court or judicial tribunal in any legal sense of those terms... They sat, sat not as a tribunal for hearing charges of crime, but as a military committee for considering a matter arising under the pro­ clamation and advising the commanding officer thereon."20 As such their lordships thought that the proceedings before the military tribunal were no criminal proceedings at all. Hence, Powell J. they thought, in reviewing the proceedings of the "so-called military court"21 was not seized of a "criminal cause or matter."22 Therefore, an appeal-would not lie from his decision.23 They further came to the conclusion that a writ of prohibition did not lie, because the military officers who purported to act in this case did not do so as a court in any legal sense of the term.2* The other reason for refusal to issue the writ was that the writ of prohibition directed to the officers would be of no avail as they had long completed their work. The prohibition could also not be granted against Generals Macready and Strikland restraining them from carrying out the sentences, because they were not officers or agents of the military court, and therefore prohibition would be ineffective against them.25 In the result, therefore, the House of Lords approved the same result arrived at by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Tilonko v. Attorney-General of Natal,25 and refused to disturb the sentences passed by a military tribunal on the ground that the 19. Ibid. 581. 20. Ibid. The House of Lords followed Tilonko v. Attorney General of Natal [1907] A.C. 93, 94. See Ibid. 581. 21. [1921] 2 A.C. 582. 22. Ibid. 23. Ibid. 24. Ibid. p. 584. See Ibid, p.' 583: The Court considered Chamber v. Jennings, 2 Salk. 553, E.R., in which Holt C.J. is reported to have said that"a prohibition would lie to a pretended court;" but in a fuller report of that case (7 Mod. 125 E.R.), no such statement is to be found* 25. [1921] ? A.C. p. 584. 26. [1907]A.C,93,94. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute §8 MAAtlAL LAW IN ENGLAND military courts were not judicial tribunals and therefore did not function as court of law from whose decision appeal could lie to higher tribunals. It is needless to say that the position taken by the House of Lords will be followed by the tribunals in England. The same authority accrues to a decision of the Privy Council wherever it has jurisdiction. These decisions lead to one anamoly. Since military tribunals are not courts, their decisions have no validity beyond the time of martial law. After the expiry of martial law, therefore, sen­ tences passed by them would expire unless given statutory sanction by Parliament or the Legislature. But, where a death sentence has been awarded and carried out, the remedy at a later stage is impossible. These decisions shut out municipal courts from undoing any wrong or arbitrary sentences awarded by the military courts.27 In World War I, there was no declaration of martial law in England although the country was involved in a bloody struggle with Germany in Europe and other theatres of war. England itself did not experience a state of war within the borders of the country, despite a few "enemy air-raids and bombardments from the sea." But still the Parliament had given the military power over the civil population to try certain offences by court- martial.28 The Defence of the Realm Consolidation Act, 1914,29 provided for vesting in-His Majesty-in-Council power to make regula­ tions, during the continuance of the war, for securing public safety and defense of the realm.30 There was a specific authorization for making regulation for the purpose of "trial by court-martial" and also by courts of summary jurisdiction in minor cases, and punishment of persons committing offences against the regulations.31 With a view to implementing this provision, regulations32 were framed providing for punishment by couVts-martial of persons alleged to be guilty of an offence against the regulations. The punish­ ments ranged from penal servitude either for a short term or life, to death penalty.33 These regulations placed the whole country under the jurisdiction 27. See Wade and Philips, Constitutional Law, 1946, p. 356. It is doubtful whether habeas corpus would lie in such cases. The question was left undecided in Sullivan's case. It is true Marais and Allen cases are not binding in England. 28. This power was vested by the Defence Act, 1914. 29. 5 George 5, c. 8. 30. Id. Sec. 1 (1). 31. Id. 32. Defence of The Realm (Consolidation) Regulations, 1914 (1914—No. 1699). See Regulations 56-58. 33. W.Reg. 57. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute ft.B. TEWARt 9§ of the military authorities, and suspended the functions of the civil courts for the trial and punishment of these offences. This was consi­ dered to be too severe and therefore the Defence of the Realm Act, 1914, was amended by the Defence of the Realm (Amendment) Act, 191534, which provided that the offences against the regulations may be tried instead by a civil court with a jury, provided that the person against whom a charge is made, claimed to be tried by a civil court.35 This guarantee, however, was suspended in the event of invasion, or other special militay emergency which might arise out of the war.36 In World War II, again, there was no proclamation of martial law in England. It was not even necessary for a moment to deprive the ordinary civil courts of their jurisdiction by substituting courts- martial in their place.37 But certain precautions were taken to cope with the emergency of a large scale invasion. This aim was designed to be achieved in two ways: one by passing the Treachery Act, 1940,38 and inserting therein a provision for trial by court-martial of an enemy alien on the direction of the Attorney-General,39 and the second by providing in
military authorities, and suspended the functions of the civil courts for the trial and punishment of these offences. This was consi­ dered to be too severe and therefore the Defence of the Realm Act, 1914, was amended by the Defence of the Realm (Amendment) Act, 191534, which provided that the offences against the regulations may be tried instead by a civil court with a jury, provided that the person against whom a charge is made, claimed to be tried by a civil court.35 This guarantee, however, was suspended in the event of invasion, or other special militay emergency which might arise out of the war.36 In World War II, again, there was no proclamation of martial law in England. It was not even necessary for a moment to deprive the ordinary civil courts of their jurisdiction by substituting courts- martial in their place.37 But certain precautions were taken to cope with the emergency of a large scale invasion. This aim was designed to be achieved in two ways: one by passing the Treachery Act, 1940,38 and inserting therein a provision for trial by court-martial of an enemy alien on the direction of the Attorney-General,39 and the second by providing in the Emergency Powers (Defence) (No. 2) Act, 1940, for creating by regulation, special courts.40 It was specifically provided in the Act that these special courts were not to be courts-martial. The regulation could provide for the apprehension, trial, and punishment of offenders by such special courts, in accordance with the procedure which may be pres­ cribed by the regulations.41 Pursuant to this authorisation, His Majesty-in-Council issued The Defence (War Zone Courts) Regulations, 1940.42 Under these regulations, the Minister of Home Security was authorized to set up by order special courts, which were to be known as War Zone Courts. But such^courts would not function unless and until the area or areas in which the War Zone Courts were to operate had been declared by an order of the Minister as a war zone area.43 Such declaration by the Minister would be made if he was satisfied that due to recent or immediately apprehended enemy action the military situation in an 34. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. 5 Geo. 5. c. 34. Id. Sec. 1 (1), (2). Id. Sec. 1 (7). Wade and Phillips, op. cit., p. 337. 3& 4 Geo. 6, «. 21. Id. Sec. 2 (1) (b). 3 & 4 Geo. 6, c. 45. Id. Sec. 1 (1). S.R. & O. 1940 (No. 1444) 11, p. 252, Id., Sec. 2. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute 100 MAMIAL LAW tK ENGLAND area was such that criminal justice could not be administered by ordinary courts with sufficient expedition.44 But such an exigency never arose, and so there was no need to invoke these provisions.45 These powers in the special courts did not affect the common law power of the military to take action on their own initiative if need arose, but it never did in England over a long period of time.46 44. Id., Sec. 5. 45. Ridges* Constitutional Law, 8th Ed., p. 256. 46. Wade, op. cit., 357-358. www.ili.ac.in © The Indian Law Institute

Enhanced Chunks:
Martial law in England has historical roots in the Court of the Constable and Marshal, which had jurisdiction over contracts related to deeds of arms and war outside the realm, as well as offenses and misconduct of soldiers contrary to laws and rules of the army. Over time, the importance of this court declined, especially during the Tudor period and the 17th century, as common law courts and Parliament viewed it unfavorably.

The jurisdiction of the Crown over the army, both at home and abroad, and over alien enemies within or outside British territory, falls under military law and the prerogative of the Crown expressed in the Mutiny Act and the Articles of War. However, the focus here is on martial law as it applies to citizens during times of rebellion, insurrection, or invasion within the state.

The relationship between the Crown and the military forces versus the citizens has evolved over British history, with the Crown's authority over the military increasing while its control over citizens has decreased. Martial law has been applied in various instances throughout history, often leading to executions without trials. Acts of Indemnity were sometimes passed to protect supporters of the Crown from responsibility for excesses committed in suppressing rebellions.

The concept of martial law and its application in England has evolved over time, reflecting changes in the Crown's authority and control over both the military and civilian populations.
It seems like you are sharing information about the historical context of martial law in England. If you have any specific questions or need assistance with a particular aspect of this topic, feel free to ask!
It seems like you are discussing the historical context of martial law in England, particularly during the reigns of Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth I, King James I, and Charles I. Martial law was declared in certain instances to deal with rebellions, treason, and other threats to the crown and the state.

During these periods, commissions of martial law were issued to grant authorities the power to use martial law in dealing with enemies, rebels, traitors, and offenders. The commissions allowed for the use of military force, including the execution of individuals deemed a threat to the crown or the state.

It is interesting to note the debate surrounding the use of martial law in England, with some legal scholars and historians questioning the legality and constitutionality of such measures. The references to commissions of martial law show the extent to which authorities were willing to go to maintain order and suppress threats to the monarchy.

If you have any specific questions or would like more information on this topic, feel free to ask!
The passage you provided discusses the historical context of martial law in England, particularly in relation to commissions issued by the Crown to govern and enforce martial law. It highlights the debate over the power of the Crown to proclaim martial law in times of danger.

According to the text, there are divergent views on who has the power to proclaim martial law. The majority opinion, as expressed in the judgment of Finch C.J., supports the recognition of the Crown's discretion to proclaim martial law during imminent danger, even when the enemy is not physically present. In such situations, the Crown may charge its subjects to take necessary actions to address the perceived danger.

On the other hand, the contrary view, as presented by Mr. Holborne, questions the extent of the Crown's power to proclaim martial law, especially in scenarios where an actual enemy invasion has not occurred.

Overall, the discussion underscores the complex legal and constitutional issues surrounding the proclamation and enforcement of martial law in England, and the balancing act between safeguarding national security and upholding individual rights and legal principles.
The passage you provided discusses the concept of martial law in England and the extent of the Crown's prerogative in implementing it. It highlights the historical context of martial law and the limitations placed on the Crown's authority through acts such as the Petition of Right. The debate surrounding the use of martial law in cases of necessity and imminent danger is also touched upon.

If you have any specific questions or need further clarification on any particular point within the passage, please feel free to ask!
It seems like you are discussing the historical context and legal perspectives regarding the Crown's authority to proclaim martial law in England. The debate surrounding the Crown's prerogative in times of emergency, as well as the historical examples cited, provide insight into the complex relationship between the Crown's powers and the rule of law.

If you are looking for a summary or further analysis of the information presented, please let me know how I can assist you specifically.
It seems like you are discussing the concept of martial law in England and the power of the government to act during emergencies such as riots, rebellion, or invasion. Martial law is considered one of the tools available to the government to address serious disorders and protect the state in times of crisis.

Based on the text you provided, it appears that there is a legal framework in England that allows for the suppression of riots and disorderly conduct. Private citizens are authorized to take action to suppress a riot if necessary, and there is a duty for individuals, both citizens, and soldiers, to act in concert with the magistrate to maintain peace and protect the state.

In situations where immediate direction or orders from the magistrate are not feasible due to the gravity of the circumstances, citizens and soldiers have the freedom and duty to take necessary actions to safeguard society. They are expected to act responsibly, and if they act in good faith to fulfill this duty, they will be supported and justified by common law.

It is emphasized that individuals are accountable before the courts of law if they fail to act in such circumstances, but they would generally be protected by the common law unless malice or negligence can be proven. The duty to maintain peace and protect the state is fundamental, and actions taken in pursuit of this duty are typically supported and justified by the legal system.

If you have any specific questions or would like further clarification on any aspect of martial law or related legal concepts in England, please feel free to ask.
It seems like you are discussing the concept of martial law in England and the role of citizens and soldiers in maintaining peace and order during times of crisis. Here are some key points based on the text you provided:

1. In the absence of direction from the magistracy, both citizens and soldiers have the freedom and duty to take initiative to protect society from subversion.
2. Citizens and soldiers must act within the bounds of the law and common law principles, and they may be held accountable if they fail to fulfill their duty.
3. The common law obligates sheriffs, constables, and other peace officers to suppress riots and restore peace, with the power to seek assistance from other citizens.
4. The principle of martial law in England does not involve the suspension of ordinary law by military tribunals but rather the common law right of the Crown and its servants to repel force by force in cases of invasion, insurrection, or violent resistance to the law.
5. Martial law is considered an extreme remedy used by the executive authority in times of rebellion or imminent danger to the State's safety, allowing the military commander to administer law when civil authority is disrupted.
6. The authority of the military commander in such situations is believed to arise from necessity and the right of self-preservation, inherent in the common law and every political system.
7. Both citizens and soldiers have the right and duty to protect the State and society, acting under the command of authorities when possible but also being allowed to take independent action in extreme circumstances.

If you have any specific questions or need further clarification on any of these points, feel free to ask!
The passage you provided discusses the concept of martial law in England, particularly in times of insurrection, civil war, or invasion. It highlights the authority of the military commander to assume power when the civil authority is unable to function due to destabilized conditions. The legal basis of this authority has been a subject of debate, with some arguing it arises from necessity and the common law right of self-preservation.

It emphasizes that every citizen, soldier, and executive has the right and duty to use force to preserve the state and society. In cases of violence or subversion, individuals have the common law right to use force against force for self-defense. The passage also touches on the difference between the common law right of individuals to take necessary action and the Crown's prerogative right to enforce martial law by proclamation.

Furthermore, it discusses the suspension of constitutional guarantees during a state of emergency under martial law, highlighting the need for accountability and potential indemnity for excesses committed during that period. It also mentions that while the Crown can authorize measures to meet emergencies, the introduction of martial law in England by prerogative authority is not widely accepted.

If you have any specific questions or need further clarification on any part of this discussion, feel free to ask.
The passage you provided discusses the concept of martial law and the legal justifications for its implementation during emergencies. Martial law is described as a measure that suspends the guarantees of the constitution and legalizes certain actions in response to a crisis or emergency situation. It is emphasized that the basis for introducing martial law in England today is the common law and the inherent right of self-preservation based on the doctrine of necessity.

Furthermore, the passage touches upon the necessity of passing an Act of Indemnity to grant immunity to individuals who may have exceeded their authority during the period of emergency. This Act protects them from indictment or legal action for any excesses committed during the emergency situation. It is also mentioned that the implementation of martial law through a proclamation is a means to introduce extraordinary measures and suspend certain legal rights temporarily.

Additionally, the passage references a historical case involving the trial of Theobald Wolfe Tone under martial law in Ireland in 1798. Tone, who had been captured and faced several charges, requested to be accorded "the death of a soldier" by being shot by a file of grenadiers. The Lord Lieutenant ultimately confirmed the sentence of death imposed by the military court.

Overall, the passage highlights the legal principles and justifications surrounding the imposition of martial law during times of emergency and the measures taken to address any excesses committed during such periods.
It seems like you have shared a passage discussing historical events related to martial law in England. If you have any specific questions or need assistance in understanding any part of the text, please feel free to ask.
The passage you provided outlines a historical case involving the arrest and subsequent death of Theobald Wolfe Tone under martial law regulations. The legal proceedings described illustrate the challenges faced by the civil courts in dealing with military actions during times of war.

In this case, the Supreme Court at Cape Town and later the Privy Council refused to grant the petitioner's request to review the military authorities' actions under martial law. The Privy Council emphasized that during times of actual war, military actions are not justiciable by civil courts, and the civil courts do not have jurisdiction to question the decisions of military authorities.

The Privy Council's decision underscored the principle that in times of war, the civil courts are not empowered to review the actions of military authorities. The case highlights the complexities and limitations faced by the judiciary when dealing with matters involving military actions under martial law.

If you have any specific questions or need further clarification on this legal case, please feel free to ask.
It seems like you are discussing a complex legal issue regarding the jurisdiction of civil courts over acts of military authorities during times of war. The discussion involves analyzing a decision from the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council and the implications of their ruling.

Based on the text you provided, it appears that there are two key propositions that were highlighted. The first proposition suggests that during times of actual war, acts done by the military authorities are not subject to review by ordinary tribunals. This raises concerns about potential misuse of power by the military authorities if they are not held accountable for their actions.

The second proposition addresses the notion that the existence of some functioning tribunals does not necessarily negate the presence of war. This challenges the traditional idea that the open court rule automatically applies in all circumstances.

The text also discusses the jurisdiction of courts to inquire into the acts of military authorities and the necessity of war or emergency that justifies their actions. It emphasizes the importance of ensuring that courts have the ability to function freely and independently, even in times of conflict.

Overall, the discussion points towards the need for a balanced approach that acknowledges the realities of war and emergency situations while also upholding legal principles and accountability.
The measures taken to depart from the open court rule and allow for military tribunals administering martial law have been justified based on the changing landscape of warfare and the need to address the realities of war and insurrection. The traditional legal fictions that were prevalent when the open court rule was established are no longer relevant in the modern context where warfare has evolved significantly due to scientific and technological advancements.

The argument is made that war cannot be denied simply because some civil courts still function, and it is crucial to acknowledge the impact of war and insurrection directly rather than relying on outdated legal fictions. The case law cited supports the idea that civil courts cannot interfere with the sentences passed by military courts under martial law, as these military tribunals serve a different purpose and are not considered traditional courts of justice.

The decision in Tilonko v. The Attorney-General of the County of Natal affirmed that military courts operating under martial law are not equivalent to regular courts and are not subject to the same appellate jurisdiction. The ruling emphasized the necessity and legitimacy of these military tribunals in times of war, highlighting that the administration of force in war does not rely on the proclamation of martial law but on the existence of war itself.

Overall, the justification for departing from the open court rule and allowing for military tribunals under martial law is rooted in the recognition of the changing nature of warfare and the need for specialized judicial mechanisms to address the unique challenges posed by war and insurrection.
It seems like you have shared a detailed legal analysis on the topic of martial law in England, particularly focusing on the jurisdiction of military courts and civil courts in certain cases. If you have any specific questions or need further clarification on any part of the text, feel free to ask.
It seems like you have provided a detailed analysis of the legal context surrounding military courts during times of war in England. If you have any specific questions or need further assistance with understanding this information, please feel free to ask.
It seems like you have provided a detailed explanation of the legal framework in England during wartime, particularly regarding the trial and punishment of offences during World War I and World War II. If you have any specific questions or need further clarification on any of the points mentioned, please feel free to ask.
